Mr. President:
I speak to you today
during a time that is holy
and filled with meaning for
believers around the world.
Earlier this week, Jewish people
gathered with family and friends
to recite the stories of their
ancestors' struggles and ultimate liberation.
Tomorrow, Christians of all
denominations will come together
to rejoice and remember the
resurrection of Jesus Christ.
These are two very different
holidays with their own very different traditions.
But it seems fitting that we
mark them both during the same week.
For in a larger sense, they are
both moments of reflection and renewal.
They are both occasions to
think more deeply about the
obligations we have to ourselves
and the obligations we have to
one another, no matter who we
are, where we come from, or what
faith we practice.
This idea - that we are all
bound up, as Martin Luther King
once said, in "a single garment
of destiny"- is a lesson of all
the world's great religions.
And never has it been more
important for us to reaffirm
that lesson than it is today -
at a time when we face tests and
trials unlike any we
have seen in our time.
An economic crisis that
recognizes no borders.
Violent extremism that has
claimed the lives of innocent
men, women, and children
from Manhattan to Mumbai.
An unsustainable dependence on
foreign oil and other sources of
energy that pollute our air and
water and threaten our planet.
The proliferation of the world's
most dangerous weapons, the
persistence of deadly disease,
and the recurrence of age-old conflicts.
These are challenges that no
single nation, no matter how
powerful, can confront alone.
The United States
must lead the way.
But our best chance to solve
these unprecedented problems
comes from acting in
concert with other nations.
That is why I met with leaders
of the G-20 nations to ensure
that the world's largest
economies take strong and
unified action in the face of
the global economic crisis.
Together, we have taken steps to
stimulate growth, restore the
flow of credit, open markets,
and dramatically reform our
financial regulatory systems
to prevent such crises from
occurring again - steps that
will lead to job creation at home.
It is only by working together
that we will finally defeat 21st
century security
threats like al Qaeda.
So it was heartening that our
NATO allies united in Strasbourg
behind our strategy in
Afghanistan and Pakistan, and
contributed important resources
to support our effort there.
It is only by coordinating with
countries around the world that
we will stop the spread of the
world's most dangerous weapons.
That is why I laid out a
strategy in Prague for us to
work with Russia and
other nations to stop the
proliferation of nuclear
weapons; to secure nuclear
materials from terrorists; and,
ultimately, to free the world
from the menace of
a nuclear nightmare.
And it is only by building a new
foundation of mutual trust that
we will tackle some of our
most entrenched problems.
That is why, in Turkey, I spoke
to members of Parliament and
university students about rising
above the barriers of race,
region, and religion
that too often divide us.
With all that is at stake today,
we cannot afford to talk past one another.
We can't afford to allow old
differences to prevent us from
making progress in
areas of common concern.
We can't afford to let
walls of mistrust stand.
Instead, we have to find - and
build on - our mutual interests.
For it is only when people
come together, and seek common
ground, that some of that
mistrust can begin to fade.
And that is where
progress begins.
Make no mistake: we live in a
dangerous world, and we must be
strong and vigilant in
the face of these threats.
But let us not allow whatever
differences we have with other
nations to stop us from coming
together around those solutions
that are essential to our
survival and success.
As we celebrate Passover,
Easter, and this time of
renewal, let's find strength in
our shared resolve and purpose
in our common aspirations.
And if we can do that, then not
only will we fulfill the sacred
meaning of these holy days, but
we will fulfill the promise of
our country as a leader
around the world.